feat: Add airgap docs (#150)
kubewarden/docs: docs/operator-manual/airgap/01-install.md

---

> sidebar_label: "Airgap installation"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: "Installation"
```

(to reduce the repetition in the sidebar)

title: ""
---

# Airgap installation

This guide will show you how to install Kubewarden in air-gapped environments. In an air-gapped installation of Kubewarden, 
you will need a private OCI registry that is located somewhere accessible by your kubernetes cluster. Kubewarden Policies 
are WebAssembly modules, therefore they can be stored inside of an OCI compliant registry as OCI artifacts.
You need to add Kubewarden's images and policies to this OCI registry. Let's see how to do that.

## Save container images in your workstation

> 1. Download `kubewarden-images.txt` from the Kubewarden [release page](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/releases/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Download `kubewarden-images.txt` from the Kubewarden [release page](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/releases/). Alternatively, you can find `imagelist.txt` and `policylist.txt` files shipped inside the helm charts, that contain the used container images and policy wasm modules respectively.
1. Optionally, you can verify the signatures of the helm charts (see "verifying Kubewarden link") prior to obtaining the list of images and policies.
```

2. Add `cert-manager` if it is not available in your private registry. 
```
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo update

> helm fetch jetstack/cert-manager --version v1.7.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helm pull jetstack/cert-manager --version v1.7.1
```

(I think `helm fetch` is deprecated and has been aliased to `helm pull`).

helm template ./cert-manager-v1.7.1.tgz | awk '$1 ~ /image:/ {print $2}' | sed s/\"//g >> ./kubewarden-images.txt
```
3. Download [kubewarden-save-images.sh](https://github.com/kubewarden/utils/blob/main/scripts/kubewarden-save-images.sh) 
and [kubewarden-load-images.sh](https://github.com/kubewarden/utils/blob/main/scripts/kubewarden-load-images.sh) from the Kubewarden utils repository.
4. Save Kubewarden container images into a tar.gz file:
```
./kubewarden-save-images.sh --image-list ./kubewarden-images.txt --images kubewarden-images.tar.gz
```
Docker begins pulling the images used for an airgap install. Be patient. This process takes a few minutes. 

> When the process completes, your current directory will output a tarball named `kubewarden-images.tar.gz`. Check that the output is in the directory.

Reviewer: Just realized, we aren't verifying the signatures of policies and images. It would be nice to do so.. ensuring the trust chain on airgap.

If there's anyone that cares about trust, is people using airgap I suppose.

Author: added a note with links to verify docs https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/9bf44be294b70fba3f49b0123f19386185715df4

## Save policies in your workstation

[kwctl](https://github.com/kubewarden/kwctl/releases) version v1.3.1 or above is required for this step.

1. Add all the policies you want to use in a `policies.txt` file. 
Example: (TODO add link to default policies.txt once it is available) 
```
registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.2.2
registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/safe-labels:v0.1.5
```
2. Download `kubewarden-save-policies.sh` and `kubewarden-load-policies.sh` from the [kwctl repository](https://github.com/kubewarden/kwctl/tree/main/scripts)
3. Save policies into a tar.gz file:
```
./kubewarden-save-policies.sh --policies-list policies.txt
```
kwctl downloads all the policies and stores then in `kubewarden-policies.tar.gz`

## Helm charts

You need to download the following helm charts in your workstation:

```
helm pull kubewarden/kubewarden-crds         
helm pull kubewarden/kubewarden-controller
helm pull kubewarden/kubewarden-defaults  
helm pull jetstack/cert-manager         
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can verify the signed Kubewarden charts (see "verifying Kubewarden link").

```

Reviewer: this has been applied, with images too. Resolving.

---
sidebar_label: "Installation"
title: ""
---

> # Airgap installation

Reviewer 2: nitpicking: we have to be consistent about how we refer to "Air gap": I can see we're using "airgap" and "air-gap".

I vote to use [`air gap`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking))

Author: done https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/4bb22cd9a36d2f12a445486e32ff690daa23b3bb

This guide will show you how to install Kubewarden in air-gapped environments. In an air-gapped installation of Kubewarden, 
you will need a private OCI registry that is located somewhere accessible by your kubernetes cluster. Kubewarden Policies 
are WebAssembly modules, therefore they can be stored inside of an OCI compliant registry as OCI artifacts.

> You need to add Kubewarden's images and policies to this OCI registry. Let's see how to do that.

Reviewer 2: I would like to have a "Requirements" section where we list all the things a user must have:

* A registry to store container images **and** policies
* A list of on-premise registries that we know can support OCI artifacts
* kwctl version X
* docker version X
* anything I might have forgot

I think it would be nice to have that as a dedicated page like:
```
Operator manual
|
 `- Air gap
    |
     `- Requirements
     `- Setup
```

Author: done https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/63a8525fc4363b5abb564515310a6941886e6d76

## Save container images in your workstation

> 1. Download `kubewarden-images.txt` from the Kubewarden [release page](https://github.com/kubewarden/helm-charts/releases/). Alternatively, you can find `imagelist.txt` and `policylist.txt` files shipped inside the helm charts, that contain the used container images and policy wasm modules respectively.

Reviewer 2: > Alternatively, you can find `imagelist.txt` and `policylist.txt` files shipped inside the helm charts

nitpicking: you hint about this other solution, but then there's no explanation about how to leverage that

Author: It is an alternative to downloading `kubewarden-images.txt`. You can either downlaod it from the release page or extract it from the helm chart. It was suggested [here](https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150#discussion_r1029032857)

:::note

> Optionally, you can verify the signatures of the [helm charts](https://docs.kubewarden.io/security/verifying-kubewarden#helm-charts) and [container images](https://docs.kubewarden.io/security/verifying-kubewarden#container-images)

Author: done https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/a7d2b8ef9de8dc67e14d7d6ea5c82f4662735907

:::
2. Add `cert-manager` if it is not available in your private registry. 
```
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo update
helm pull jetstack/cert-manager --version v1.7.1
helm template ./cert-manager-v1.7.1.tgz | awk '$1 ~ /image:/ {print $2}' | sed s/\"//g >> ./kubewarden-images.txt
```
3. Download [kubewarden-save-images.sh](https://github.com/kubewarden/utils/blob/main/scripts/kubewarden-save-images.sh) 
and [kubewarden-load-images.sh](https://github.com/kubewarden/utils/blob/main/scripts/kubewarden-load-images.sh) from the Kubewarden utils repository.
4. Save Kubewarden container images into a tar.gz file:
```
./kubewarden-save-images.sh --image-list ./kubewarden-images.txt --images kubewarden-images.tar.gz
```
Docker begins pulling the images used for an airgap install. Be patient. This process takes a few minutes. 

> When the process completes, your current directory will output a tarball named `kubewarden-images.tar.gz`. Check that the output is in the directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the process completes, your current directory will contain a file named `kubewarden-images.tar.gz`.
```

## Save policies in your workstation

> [kwctl](https://github.com/kubewarden/kwctl/releases) version v1.3.1 or above is required for this step.

Reviewer 2: This can be dropped once we a requirements section

1. Add all the policies you want to use in a `policies.txt` file. 
Example: (TODO add link to default policies.txt once it is available) 
```
registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.2.2
registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/safe-labels:v0.1.5
```

> 2. Download `kubewarden-save-policies.sh` and `kubewarden-load-policies.sh` from the [kwctl repository](https://github.com/kubewarden/kwctl/tree/main/scripts)

Reviewer 2: Aren't we going to add this file to the GH release artifacts? I would do that (add the file to the release) and point to the release page instead of the `main` branch

Author: done in https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/a0514f49871192376d6774e8a11e5e287acb784a 
this [PR](https://github.com/kubewarden/kwctl/pull/364) adds the scripts to the kwctl release

3. Save policies into a tar.gz file:
```
./kubewarden-save-policies.sh --policies-list policies.txt
```
kwctl downloads all the policies and stores then in `kubewarden-policies.tar.gz`

## Helm charts

You need to download the following helm charts in your workstation:

```
helm pull kubewarden/kubewarden-crds         
helm pull kubewarden/kubewarden-controller
helm pull kubewarden/kubewarden-defaults  

> helm pull jetstack/cert-manager         

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that `cert-manager` has to be downloaded only if the air gap cluster doesn't yet have cert-manager installed

Author: done https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/e53d00527ce50bc30803c98ebb210f746464c0ca

```

> Then move the helm chart tar.gz files to your air-gapped environment.

Reviewer 2: I would drop this line, this is basically the title of the next section

Author: done

## Populate private registry

Move `kubewarden-policies.tar.gz`, `kubewarden-images.tar.gz`, `kubewarden-load-images.sh`, `kubewarden-load-policies.sh` and `policies.txt`
to the air-gapped environment.

1. load Kubewarden images into the private registry
```

> ./kubewarden-load-images.sh --image-list ./kubewarden-images.txt --images kubewarden-images.tar.gz --registry <REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>

Reviewer 2: Point out that the docker client must be authenticated against the local registry. Explain where all the images are going to be pushed (like `<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>/kubewarden`. That's because some users might has internal IT to create the `kubewarden` namespace and give them push and pull rights to it.

Author: https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/150/commits/618c4564566ba988e8259624178384849f7c5d7a

```
2. load Kubewarden policies into the private registry  
```
./kubewarden-load-policies.sh --policies kubewarden-policies.tar.gz --policies-list policies.txt --registry <REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT> --sources-path sources.yml 
```

> :::note

Reviewer 2: I would make that a `caution` block:

```suggestion
:::caution
```

> Go to [kwctl documentation](https://docs.kubewarden.io/distributing-policies/custom-certificate-authorities) to learn more about how to configure your sources.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `sources.yaml` file is needed by kwctl to connect to registries that fall into these categories:

* Authentication required
* Self signed certificate is being used
* No TLS termination is done

Please refer to [this section](../distributing-policies/custom-certificate-authorities.md) of our documentation to learn more about how to configure the `sources.yaml` file
```

Note: I hope I got the relative link right

::: 

## Install kubewarden. 

Let's install Kubewarden now that we have everything we need in our private registry. The only difference with a normal
Kubewarden installation is that we need to change the registry in the container images and policies to our private registry.

Install cert-manager:

```
helm install --create-namespace cert-manager ./cert-manager-v1.7.1.tgz \
    -n kubewarden \
    --set installCRDs=true \
    --set image.repository=<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>/quay.io/jetstack/cert-manager-controller \
    --set webhook.image.repository=<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>/quay.io/jetstack/cert-manager-webhook \
    --set cainjector.image.repository=<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>/quay.io/jetstack/cert-manager-cainjector \
    --set startupapicheck.image.repository=<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>/quay.io/jetstack/cert-manager-ctl

> ```

Reviewer 2: Some comments:

* Point out this has to be done only if the air gap cluster does not have cert-manager already installed
* You are referencing to a really specific version of cert-manager (`cert-manager-v1.7.1.tgz`). Point out they will have to change that reference to whatever file they actually have

Let's install the Kubewarden stack:

```
helm install --wait -n kubewarden kubewarden-crds.tgz
```

```
helm install --wait -n kubewarden kubewarden-controller.tgz --set common.cattle.systemDefaultRegistry=<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>
```

```
helm install --wait -n kubewarden kubewarden-defaults.tgz --set common.cattle.systemDefaultRegistry=<REGISTRY.YOURDOMAIN.COM:PORT>
```

Finally, we need to configure PolicyServers to fetch policies from our private registry. See the [using private registry](https://docs.kubewarden.io/operator-manual/policy-servers/private-registry) section of the docs.

> Now we can create Kubewarden policies in our cluster! Policies must be available in your private registry.

Reviewer 2: BTW, the consultants are fine having the user "figure out" how to do the substitution of the registry
